# Angol

---

## Supermarkets / markets
There are 2 pictures. In the first one there is a supermarket, and in the second one there is a marketplace. Both of them have their own advantages and disadvantages.  If you do your shopping at the supermarket, you can find everything under one roof: dairy products, different kinds of meat, fruit and vegetables, groceries, tea, coffee, newspapers, sweets and chocolate, etc. So it can be quite comfortable. Also the goods can be cheaper. As for the shop assistants, some of them are polite and helpful, others can be unfriendly even rude. It often happens, that you can't find anybody if you want to ask something. Market places are usually open areas, so in bad weather it can be uncomfortable to do your shopping there. Plus there are only one or two in a city, so you must travel a lot to find one. However the products especially the fruit and vegetables are really fresh, because they usually came right from the owners garden. That's why prices are often higher, but you can always find something cheap for yourself, if you are patient enough to go around. the sellers are always friendly because they want to sell their products. As for my family we usually go to the supermarket because it is closer to our home, but when we can, we go to the market, because there are some products, that we only buy from the owners: for example, eggs.

<br />

## Sightseeing / hiking
There are 2 pictures. In the first one there is a famous building, and in the second one there is a mountain. If you go sightseeing, you can visit the most popular buildings in the city, for example: churches, castles, statues, bridges, parks, museums, streets, etc. So it can be quite interesting. Also it is easy to travel around the city, because most of the big cities have different kinds of public transport, and definitely cheap. As for the tour guides, sometimes they can be boring, as they talk about a place for hours, and they just telling us the dry history. Sometimes they don't even notice when they're boring. Hiking in the mountains is a good activity. It's great for your mental and physical health as well. you can easily connect. with nature. Moreover the view is amazing. On the other hand, you have to carry all your staff, so it can be sweaty. Furthermore it's weather dependent, so in bad weather you have to stay at home. As for me, I usually go hiking, because it' more relaxing. I always bring friends or the family with me, so when a wild animal attack us, i'm not alone, and we have a bigger chance to survive.

<br />

## Financial matters
People have different attitudes to money. Some people spend all their money the moment they get it. What is more, they spend it on unnecessary things or on luxuries. That means that by the end of the month they usually have no money left. They often borrow money from friends or family members, which of course they have to pay back. The problem is, that you don't like landing money even to your friends if you know, that they don't economize and won't pay it back soon. Unfortunately these people can't make ends meet. However most people budget their money wisely. They know how much they need for living expenses, for their children and they even put some aside. Most people keep their money in banks. You can keep a bank account and it's useful to have a Credit card, and you can pay with it almost everywhere. I already have a Credit card, and i really like it. A lot of parents give pocket money to their children. It's not a bad idea, as children can learn how to spend money in a sensible way. As for me, i don't need pocket money, because i usually work during the summer holiday, so i have my own money.

<br />

## Trains / cars
Both of them have their own pros and cons. Trains can be faster than cars. What's more trains can be quite comfortable, clean, air-conditioned, and there's also internet connection. Another big advantages is, that you don't get tired mentally as you don't have to drive. You can sleep, study, read, or even chat with other passengers. The biggest disadvantages of taking a train is, that somehow you have to get to the station. Cars can be more comfy then trains as you have your own little space. The only problem is, that you must have a drivers license to drive. But sitting on the back seat is not that bad at all. Moreover the drivers always needs to be careful and awake. Cars unfortunately produce carbon dioxide and exhaust fumes, so it's definitely not environmental friendly. Lot of people travel alone in their car instead of using trains, because they too lazy. As for me, and my family we use a car, but only my father can drive, so when I want to go to somewhere alone, I travel by public transport. All in all I prefer trains, as i only have good experiences with it.

<br />

## Fast food / traditional food
There are two pictures. In the first one there is a hamburger, and in the second one there is a salad. Both of them have their own advantages and disadvantages. Some people buy fast food because they don't have enough time to make lunch, so it's easier to go to McDonald's and eat a hamburger. The quality of these dishes is quit low, and the vegetables are not always fresh. Also it's pretty unhealthy in the long turn. However the prices are lower. To tell the truth young people like to go to fast food restaurants with their friends, because the atmosphere is relaxed, they can have a chat there and they can stay as long as they like. When you go to a traditional restaurant, you can have a great time with your family because it's usually families who go there. It's true that it's more expensive, but the food is healthier. What is more you don't have to stand in a queue, but you can order your meal from your waiter. Food an drink is not served on paper or plastic plates, or paper cups. On the other hand sometimes you have to wait quite long, while your meal is prepared. In a traditional restaurant, it's advisable to leave a tip as well. As for me, I usually go to a fast food restaurant with my friends, because we can talk there for hours. But i prefer the traditional restaurant for family occasions, as we can all dress up nicely and have a great time together. All in all I don't really like fast food, but the restaurants are pretty cool.

<br />

## Women's role in society
In the past, until the beginning of the 20th century, women didn't usually go out to work. They stayed at home, did the house work, and raised the children. They learned to read and write, but they didn't go to secondary or higher education. The husband was the breadwinner of the family. However women's role has changed a lot for the past hundred years. More and more women have a job and get a university degree. Unfortunately it's not that easy to find the balance between being a housewife or a career women. That's why some women still choose to stay at home, especially while the children are young. I guess it's full time work, because they have a lot of things to do, like doing the washing, feeding the children, cleaning the house etc. Some women find it monotonous and boring, so they choose to take the children to nurseries and kindergarten, and they find a job for themselves. It's not easy to find the balance between your family and your job. The way i see it, it's so hard to be a housewife and have a job at the same time. So it is important to talk about this with your family, because children can help with little things as well. It's not a shame to ask for help, because sometimes you don't have enough energy for both your job and your house. All in all, in my opinion women can manage so many things alone, because they're all heroes.

<br />

## Old kitchen / modern kitchen
In the past kitchens used to be the center of family life. usually they were the warmest places in the house. So family members came here to warm up, eat something, or simply have a chat with the mother of the family, who spent most of her time there. As there were no gadgets it took much longer to prepare the family meal. There was a stove and everything was made on it. Also, as you can see, they hung the wet clothes in the kitchen, because that was the only place they dried. In the second picture there is a super modern kitchen with lots of gadgets like a cooker, a fridge, a freezer, a microwave etc. As most women go out to work, they don't have too much time to cook meals. So these gadgets are off great help. However I would say that it's not as warm as friendly as the old kitchen. Families came together in the living room or in the dining room most of the time, although sometimes I like to sit down with my mum and have a mug of tea or a cup of coffee, and chat.

<br />

## The job of a gardener / doctor
In these two pictures, we can see two kinds of professions. They are totally different. Doctors have to learn a lot before they get their degrees. In my opinion it's the most responsible job in the whole world, because you have to treat sick people. You see a lot of suffering and pain, and also deaths. But on the other hand, what can be more beautiful, then cure people. They work is really demanding, because they work in unsocial hours like at night or at weekends. They mustn't make mistakes, and have to have empathy towards people. I guess they are underpaid, and I think good doctors would deserve more. It's mental work, but can be physically demanding as well. I would like to be a doctor as I have a passion about helping people, and the atmosphere in the hospitals is familiar for me, so my biggest goal is to achieve this dream. I guess gardeners are trained at universities so they also need a degree. Maybe their work is not as demanding as the doctors, but it also can be hard, because it's seasonal. That means, that they have to work from early spring to late autumn, and can take their holidays usually in winter. It's also weather dependent, because they have to work a lot outside. However it's quite healthy, to be in the fresh air, and to do physical activity. I my view, both professions are beautiful.

<br />

## Big / small families
In one of the pictures we can see a huge family with several children. An also grandparents, aunts, uncles. Living in a big family definitely has it's pros and cons. First of all you can always find someone to help you if you have any problems. Also elder children can help the younger ones. Grandma can cook for the whole family, and ca help with the housework. Plus she can look after babies. And when grandparents get very old and sick, they can easily be looked after. However you don't have too much time for yourself in such a big family. What is more, there is no privacy. On the other hand when you are an only child or there are two children you more attention from your parents. But you don't get much help from your grandparents. We are five in our family. My mum, dad, my 2 brothers and me. Actually I would like a small family, because I want to give enough attention to all of my children and my husband, but because of my job, I won't have so much free time, so I don't want to left them behind.

<br />

## Keeping pets
There are two pictures. In the first one there is a spider and in the second one there is a dog. Many people decide to buy a pet as there are lot of advantages of keeping one. According to studies animals can help people to lower their anxiety. Nowadays mental illnesses it's a pretty common illness, and usually teenagers have it.That's why therapists recommend to buy a pet like a dog or cat. Moreover there are special animals that are trained by professional trainers, so they could help people who have disabilities. So I guess traditional pets are pretty popular. On the other hand, some people tend to keep exotic animals like snakes, spiders, frogs etc. They are really brave as these creatures can be dangerous. Also you have to build a cage or terrarium, that reminds them to their natural habitat. Secondly, keeping a pet is a big responsibility, as you have to take them to the vet, and you have to give them food, or wash them etc. So if you don't have much free time, you shouldn't have a pet. As for me, I have 3 cats. They are outdoor cats, but in bad weather sometimes we let them in. I take good care of them, and I love them very much.

<br />

## Keeping fit and healthy
There are two pictures. In the first one there is a gym and in the second one there are vegetables and fruits. There is a huge variety of activities in order to keep fit, especially nowadays. For example going to the gym, swimming, or running. Outdoor activities not only make you fit, but vitamin-D and fresh air improves your health too. However exercising is not enough, a balanced diet is the key to a healthy lifestyle. Eating a lot of fruits and vegetables is essential. Although some people disagree with the fact that meat is good for your health, it provides protein, fiber and nutrition. Another essential thing is when it comes to keeping healthy is our mental health. Maintaining relationships and avoiding stress is just as important as doing sports or having a diet. All in all I find it crucial to keep fit and healthy however difficult it may seem.

<br />

## Home entertainment
There are different forms of home entertainment, like watching TV, listening to music, playing video games, reading, chatting with family members or even playing with them. Watching programs on TV alone can be relaxing, but sometimes it can be boring. I think it's essential to select films and programs that you are interested in instead of sitting on the sofa watching anything that's on, just to kill the time. I only watch TV at the weekend, because I don't have too much free time during the week, but my family watch the news every evening. Playing board games with friends or family members can be great fun and also can teach you a lot. For example children can learn how to lose or how to pay attention to each other and how to work in a team. Also while playing you can have great conversations. As for my family we always play with board games on family occasions like birthdays or on holidays like Christmas Eve.

<br />

## Old / modern classrooms
In the past there used to be very big classes with 50-60 pupils of different ages. There usually were only desks and chairs in the classrooms, plus a blackboard. There was a teacher who usually explained everything but there was no time for the children to work in teams and practice. For them the most important thing was to learn to read and write. In some parts of the world children still learn in such classrooms. However modern classrooms and teaching methods are totally different. there is usually a smart board, students use their own laptops, and they do project work, work in teams or pairs. Today it's very important to learn computer skills and languages which they didn't do in the past. However in my opinion we should solve the problem of giving the students too much material to learn. Why do we have to remember facts that can be found on the internet anyway.

<br />

## Different ways of doing homework
There are different ways of doing homework. some students like doing it alone, others prefer studying with friends or classmates. Both of them have their own pros and cons. Maybe it's easier to concentrate if you sit in a quiet room with nobody around. I guess it's also faster. On the other hand when you need help you can't ask anyone. True that you can always find someone on social websites to ask for help. Some people especially the younger students like doing their homework in the library with friends. I guess it's also more fun for them. I've been studying alone since I started school. I think I can be more efficient, because when I study with friends we always talk a lot and hours later I realize that I haven't finished with my homework and it's already late. I usually start with the hardest subjects so I have more time for them. After that, I move over to the writing tasks. I always turn on my favorite song playlist, as it helps me to concentrate, and it also cheers me up. Also I like to use my laptop instead of my phone . because I don't get distracted by social media. All in all i try to focus on the main subjects because of the final exams, so I select all the other ones.

<br />

## Environment pollution
Unfortunately these days environmental pollution is one of the biggest problems we have to face. There are different kinds of pollution like air pollution, water pollution or even space pollution. The air especially in big cities is getting more and more polluted from the exhaust fumes of cars, and also from smoke that factory chimneys give out. I think we have to find a solution to this problem as soon as possible as polluted air can cause lots of diseases for example public transport should be improved or more electric car should be produced and we should also encourage people to use their bikes or to walk. Water pollution is a great problem too. More and more plastic gets into the ocean, which is poison us from fish and all the living creatures in the waters. Because of air and water pollution our climate is changing as well. Because of global warming at a lot of places on Earth the weather is hotter and hotter, and there is no rain for a long time. At some places even drinking water is hard to find. Due to the climate change, forest fires and deforestation, lots of animals lose their habitats and get in the danger of extension. For example: polar bears as the icecap on the poles is melting rapidly. In my opinion everybody could and should do something for he environment. Luckily more and more people are environment conscious and collect the rubbish selectively, don't use so much plastic, buy drinks in reusable bottles. As for me I try to do what I can: switch off the light and all my gadgets when I leave the room, turn off the tap, while brushing my teeth, or have a quick shower instead of a bath. I agree with the saying: "think globally, act locally".

<br />

## Using mobile phones 
These days everybody has got at least one mobile phone. Most people can't imagine their life without them. Actually, they can be pretty useful for example in case of emergency you can call an ambulance or the fire brigade you can keep in touch with your family members or friends easily, etc. On the other hand you are always available which can be uncomfortable sometimes. for instance your boss can call you anytime or advertising companies can reach you. Most people have smart phones. Of course I also own one. I like to use social media, but I have to be careful as i know, that I can easily get addicted. That's why I turn off all the notifications. Also I prefer talking on the phone then writing messages.

<br />

## School life 
School is not just about learning it's also about spending time with your friends or classmates and having fun together at different programmes. Unfortunately during this pandemic the number of programmes has been reduced. While we were at the online school, it was hard to keep in touch with everybody. Sadly, some of my friends stopped talking to me, so I didn't meet with them. On the other hand, my best friends and I tried to meet at least once a week. But now we are back at school so there is plenty of opportunities to hang out with your friends. At the weekends, there are parties where you can go if you want to have an amazing time. Also there are pretty good concerts, especially during the summer. Of course the introverts can choose from a big variety too. For example: they can join to different study circles, or clubs. It is also important to not just go out with your friends, but with your classmates. Class trips can be so cool.
